I pray you're all doing well. My dear
brothers and sisters, I have missed you.
It's been uh two weeks since our last
session. Subhan Allah. I apologize. You
know, last week um I couldn't join our
session because as I mentioned, I was
traveling at that time. And
alhamdulillah, I'm here in Australia
now. I was in Sydney all of last week
and I'm in Melbourne this week. So, it
is actually Tuesday afternoon right now
at 12:00 p.m. So, I know for those of
you on the East Coast, it's uh Monday
night at 8:00 p.m., but it shows you the
difference in time. Subhan Allah. So,
alhamdulillah, I'm really glad and happy
that Allahhana tala granted me the and
the ability to be with uh all of you
again today so that we can study his
beautiful book. And in today's session,
we actually have the very valuable story
uh of the man whom Allah subhana wa
ta'ala granted two gardens to. So that's
what we want to discuss. So let's begin
by praising Allah subhana wa tala and
thanking him and then seeking his aid
and
assistance. Alhamdulillah.
What
So my dear brothers and sisters,
inshallah today we will be beginning the
story of the man with the two
gardens. So let us start off with these
verses where Allah subhana wa ta'ala
says and these are verses 32 and 33 for
those of you that are following along
with your notes uh and with the
PowerPoint slides. Actually, before I
even begin, let uh me see if I can
um actually are you able to see the
PowerPoint slide? Can you guys let me
know? Are you guys able to see the
PowerPoint
slide before I go further? Because I'm
always worried now that when I travel
with my laptop, will the PowerPoint
slide show up or not? So, I'm
hoping it is going to show up. So, can I
get a quick confirmation? Is the
PowerPoint slide showing up on your
screen?
Alhamdulillah. Thank you so much. So let
us
begin. Allahhana he tells us in these
verses.
[Music]
and present to them an example of two
men. We were granted to one of them two
gardens of grape vines, and we bordered
them with palm trees, and placed between
them fields of crops. Each of the two
gardens produced its fruit, and did not
fall short thereof in anything. and we
cause to gush forth within them a river.
So Allah subhana wa ta'ala he gives the
example uh he he he actually puts forth
an example
right and present to them of Muhammad
sallallahu alaihi wasallam the example
of two men now when Allah subhana wa
ta'ala gives forth an example in the
Quran we have to understand that it's
not just for the sake of a story it's
not just for the sake of you know
entertainment but there is a very deep
and profound lesson that is meant to uh
be extracted from it.
And he actually has a book of parables
from the Quran. So he gathers all the
examples that Allahh gives in the Quran
and then focuses on um you know what are
the lessons that we're meant to extract
from it. So here Allah subhana wa ta
tells us that this is the example of two
men. Now is this something that was
based on reality or is this that or is
this something that um is just being
portrayed as an example? The scholars
differed on this. Those that said that
it was based on reality actually gave
very specific examples.
So he says that this is the story of two
men
from the the tribes of Makkah. Two men
from the tribes of Mecca meaning be
before Islam and Allahhana related to
their story. uh Abbas and he has an
opinion that no these are two brothers
from and he actually gives a very uh
detailed and elaborate version of the
story. He says that these were two
brothers whom their father had passed
away whom their father had passed away
and when their father passed away he
left behind 8,000 dinar which was
divided amongst the two of them. So one
brother he spent it on buying this
garden and investing his money and
buying a house and basically you know uh
preparing for the life of this world.
The other brother he invested in the so
anytime his brother would buy something
from this dunya he would give in charity
and would spend for the sake of the till
the time came where he had no money
left. Till the time came where he had no
money left. So he came to his brother
asking for help and assistance. He came
to his brother asking for help and
assistance. And then this is where the
story that is mentioned over here
begins. This is the story uh between the
two brother where it begins. And subhan
Allah it's um very fascinating on how
the two extremes are portrayed. And I
don't like using the word extreme but
I'm referring to the two ends of the
spectrum right. So one end of the
spectrum one man spent everything
towards the dunya. the other end of the
spectrum everything towards the and then
you always find that our dean always
comes in the middle right so I know this
is not the time and place where we're
discussing the of charity but this is
something that's good to know that the
vast majority of scholars actually
disliked that an individual give all of
their wealth away in charity they
differed as to how much you should give
away they said up to a third
um up to two/3s is fine right you can
give uh up to two/3s away or up to
one/ird away. uh and this is based upon
the hadith of the prophet sallallahu
alaihi
wasallam that giving you know one-third
of your charity away and even that may
be uh considered too much even that may
be considered too much but then people
always ask you know what what about the
famous story of Abu Bakr and Omar where
Omar gave away half of his wealth and
charity and Abu
Bakr give away all of his wealth and
charity but this is based upon their
level of im their level of in Allah
subhana wa tala and their ability to
handle those hardships
particularly their their families and
the love of im that they had. Right? So
those are exceptions to the rule. But
the general rule is give from charity.
Uh that which will make you feel a pinch
each and every single time. Meaning you
feel some sort of struggle but not to
the degree that you give every single
that is something that is disliked. That
is something that is disliked according
to the scholars. So here we have the
story of these two men. So now Allah
subhana wa ta'ala he tells us about the
luxury that this man that invested in
this dunya has now accumulated that he
now has two gardens and each of these
gardens has grape vine leaves just
growing everywhere. So I want you to
think of if you've ever been to Islamic
Corttoba, you know, uh in Spain on what
those gardens must have been like,
Subhan Allah, right? And you have these
luscious grape wines growing everywhere
and this this beautiful design that's
taking place. So obviously grapes are
growing there. And then Allahhana says
that they're also surrounded by date
palm trees. So that the inside of it is
the grape vines. The outside of it is
the date palm trees and then even around
that you have like um fields of crops
that are growing in between the layers
of the grapes and the layers of the the
day palm trees. Subhan Allah. And then
dividing these two gardens, you have
this river that is gushing forth. You
have this river that is gushing forth.
So it's providing for the land. It's
providing for yourself. And uh the land
is very fertile and its fruits are
constantly growing and the harvest is
always ripe and full and it's never
diseased. It never falls short and it
provides plentifully. Right? And
particularly from the mindset of an
individual that is in the middle of a
desert, right? You have to understand
that this Quran is being revealed to
Muslims and non-Muslims that are living
literally in the in the middle of a
desert. So for them this is like the
description of Jenna almost right. This
is the description of Jenna and someone
is having it here on earth. And here
Allahhana is giving an example of whom
Allahhana gives the dunya to as much as
they possibly could imagine and want
from it because they have luscious food.
They have uh unlimited amount of drink.
Uh and obviously the they're living in
luxury. They're living in luxury like
what more could you want from this dunya
particularly at that time particularly
at that time. So this is who that man
had become that Allah subhana wa ta had
granted him so much and had even given
him more because as we'll find in the
next verse that he'll have plenty of
gold and silver he'll have this massive
mansion and he'll have many servants and
many workers working for him. So what
are the lessons that we take from these
two verses that Allah subhana wa ta
transition transitions into the story of
the people of the garden and that's who
we're going
into. Scholars say the two people in the
story were brothers or business
partners. Allah subhana wa ta'ala
attributes all the blessings to himself.
The biggest mistake we can make is to
attribute our blessings to ourselves and
our own efforts. And this is something
that we'll, you know, see time and time
again throughout this story. Grape wines
are one of the most delicate types of
plants. So Allahhana protected them with
date palm trees around them. Protected
them with date palm trees around them.
So then Allahhana goes on to say
that he goes on to say, "And he had
fruit." So he said to his companion
while he was conversing with him, "I am
greater than you in wealth and mightier
in numbers of men." And he entered his
garden while he was unjust to himself.
He said, "I do not think that this will
perish ever and I do not think the hour
will occur and even if I should be
brought back to my Lord, I will surely
find better than this as a return."
Subhan Allah. So, starting off at the
beginning, meaning that this harvest,
the the the fields that he had and the
grapes that he had, they constantly used
to pro provide fruit. So throughout to
the year he always has fruit and that's
not something that's normal, right? So
he's always having this fruit. And now
he turns to his brother who's in a very
desperate situation. You can imagine his
his brother is is desperate, disheveled,
hasn't eaten, you know, food in a long
time. And they're entering into his
garden now and he's having a
conversation with him. And it's amazing
how Allah both of these times it shows
us, you know, the intention of a
conversation. So this man when he's
having his conversation with his
brother and he's having a conversation
with him is to uplift himself up and to
show how mighty and strong he is and how
wealthy he is. But as we see in the in
the coming verses when the other brother
starts the conversation and response to
him what is his intention? So let's
focus on that when we get there
inshallah. So now this brother that has
this wealth, he says that I am greater
than you in wealth and I have many many
more workers and servants than you. Like
look how mighty and powerful I am.
Subhan Allah. And this is something that
you have to to keep in mind that anyone
that becomes delusional in this life
that they can survive without Allah
subhana wa ta'ala that they're
independent of Allah subhana wa ta'ala
that they're mighty and powerful without
Allah subhana wa ta'ala time and time
again we have seen Allah subhana wa
ta'ala humiliate and forced them into
being humble force them into being
humble like this is just the sunnah of
Allahhanaa
So you can already tell what's about to
come. Even if you don't know what
happens next in the surah, you already
know that it's about to happen because
this is the sunnah of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala. So this man is so arrogant and
so proud that not only is he delusional
thinking that this is all his and that
this is going to last forever, but he's
now belittling and demeaning towards his
own brother. Subhan Allah. Someone comes
to you in your time of need in into
their time into their time of need and
you are arrogant and proud and you
showing off your wealth at that time
rather than trying to be humble and have
humility and being kind towards this
individual. Subhan Allah. So then
Allahhana goes on to
say that he enters into his garden and
he is being oppressive over himself. He
is being oppressive over himself. Now
what are the things that he's doing
wrong? Number one, not attributing his
success to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
Number two, not thanking Allahhana tala
for the blessings that he's given him.
Number three, being unkind and um you
know merciless to this person that's
seeking his help, to this person that's
seeking this help. And then we go on to
see the other uh forms of him denying
the signs of the day of judgment and him
also being delusional to thinking that
Allah subhana wa ta'ala will give him so
much more. him also being delusional in
thinking that Allah subhana wa ta'ala
will give him so much more. So these are
the different forms of oppression that
he is committing against
himself that I do not think that this
will ever perish. And this is what ends
up happening that subhan Allah when you
surround yourself with this dunya and
the people of this dunya that's all you
ever end up living for and you just
think to yourself you know what this
will never perish and this was going to
last forever but as we know as the
sunnah of Allah subhana wa ta'ala
nothing lasts forever in this life
nothing lasts forever in this life so
one of the signs of delusion is to think
that you will uh last forever
And one of the signs of delusion is to
even seek immortality, right? And this
is something in our times, you know,
particularly uh for those of you that
follow uh Silicon Valley culture, like
Silicon Valley culture is one of the
strangest things on the planet. Like
they want to be able to engineer their
lives and their bodies for immortality.
So you'll see people like you know Jack
Dorsey uh from Twitter uh Elon Musk uh
and others you know the way that they
live their lives with regards to
different things uh of of methods of
fasting different you know medicines
that they'll take different practices
that they'll do all for the sake of
trying to increase their lifespan as
much as possible. But for the believer
that's not the case because our case is
we're in this life for a limited amount
of time to accumulate as much as we can
of the to invest as much as we can in
the but if you don't believe in that all
you're going to want is immortality to
try to make the most of the life of this
world. Subhan Allah. And this is what
happens that as soon as you want
everything from the life of this world
that will force you to forget the life
of the hereafter.
And I do not think that the hour will
ever be established. And this is also
from you know I think let's step back a
little bit. The reason why Allah is
giving this example of two men the man
with all the wealth represents the
Quraysh and the man that is poor is are
the believers right but their end
results are very very different as we're
going to see. Their end results are very
very different as we're going to see. So
the Qur they denied the existence of the
hereafter and they rejected uh the day
of judgment and then we'll go to see how
what the responses are to that. So this
man
says, "And I do not think that the hour
is ever going to be
established. And if somehow some
miraculous way I ever do end up being
brought back to my Lord, I will surely
find better than this in return." Now,
what does this mean exactly? And why is
he thinking like this? So he's denied
the hereafter and he's denied the day of
judgment. But he leaves this room for
you know possibility that even if there
does exist a day of judgment I will find
better with my lord than what I already
have. Where is this delusion coming
from? The belief that Allah subhana wa
ta'ala gives the dunya to only those
whom he loves. Right? And we've
discussed this in the past. Allah
subhanaa tala gives the dunya to
everyone but he only gives the dean and
understanding of the religion and
righteous deeds to those whom he loves.
Only gives those righteous deeds and
understanding of the dean and the dean
to those whom he loves. Now I understand
on a theor theoretical level we all
believe this. But how do we transform
our minds to this? What I mean by that
is when we see people with a lot of
wealth, do we believe that they're more
blessed? When we see people with less
wealth, do they do we believe that
they're being tested and tried? Right?
So, we should not necessarily assume
that anyone that has more wealth is more
blessed. We should not automatically
assume that anyone that has less wealth
is being tried and tested, right? But
rather, it's all relative to the
individual themselves. It's all relative
to the individual themselves.
There's a beautiful statement uh
attributed to Im Ahmed where he was
asked what is true as aceticism what is
zud right in Islam and he says that it
is that if you were given a 100,000 uh
dinars it wouldn't make you happier and
if a 100,000 dinars are lost by you or
taken away from you wouldn't increase in
sadness you wouldn't increase in sadness
so your attachment is not to the
material possession but it is to the one
that is giving and taking but is to the
one that is giving and taking. So one
should not assume that more is better.
More is not necessarily better unless it
comes to dean and righteous deeds.
Unless it comes to dean and righteous
deeds. But when it comes to the dunya,
more of the dunya brings more
accountability. And more accountability
can either bring great amounts of
success if used appropriately or it can
bring great amounts of failure if
misappropriated if
misappropriated. So the word refers to
the fact that the brother had many
avenues of income and many different
types of wealth that he was benefiting
from. Right? So you can imagine the
massive house, massive sources of uh of
uh income coming through either through
his fruits and vegetables, through his
real estate, whatever it may have be
through his workers and employers, so on
and so forth. In the middle of their
conversation, he mentioned his wealth.
We should always be aware of our tone
when speaking to others and to make sure
it does not sound condescending. Right?
This is so important, Subhan Allah, to
be considerate and mindful of others and
respectful of others regardless of what
our circumstances are and what their
circumstances are. Right? Be kind to
everyone, but be even more kind to those
that are in need of help. Be even more
kind to those that are in need of help.
Shayan makes people believe that they
are on top and that they they will never
fall. So this delusional state of mind
he used what he had in to expect success
in the but Allahhana does not use the
same variables of success or so it is
not a sign of love it is not a sign of
success Allahhana gives the dunya to
everyone but he only gives the dean and
understanding of it and good deeds to
those whom he loves. Allahhana maketh of
those whom he loves.
Then Allahhana goes on to
say his companion said, to him meaning
his brother. Now this is the poor
brother that is speaking while he was
conversing with him. Have you
disbelieved in he who created you from
dust and then from a spurn and then
proportioned you as a man? But as for me
he is Allah my Lord and I do not
associate with my Lord anyone. And why
did you when you entered your garden not
say what Allah w has occurred. There is
no power uh except in Allah. Although
you see me less than you in wealth and
in children. I'm just going to drink
some water
now. So now this brother, you know, he
patiently heard everything that he had
to say to him and he now prepares his
response. And it's interesting how the
first brother when he prepared his when
he spoke it's all about himself and his
greatness and he's very condescending
towards his brother and the intention is
very evil right it's a very evil
intention look at how great I am look at
how amazing I am now this brother starts
to speak and his intention is pure he's
purely just about reminding this person
of Allah subhana wa ta'ala but let's
look at some of the words that he
chooses he says
Have you disbelieved in the one that
created you from soil and then created
you from this reproductive
um fluid and then uh shaped you into a
man? Why does he use this chain uh of or
this train of thought and argument?
Because when you look at the day of
judgment, what's happening on the day of
judgment? Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala will
regenerate and recreate uh our bodies
and they will be reunited with our souls
and that is what the day of judgment is
going to to be all about. Now even
though nothing is difficult for Allah
subhana wa ta'ala from a human
perspective though what is more
difficult to initiate something out of
nothing or to recreate something that
already exists right from a human
perspective to create something out of
nothing is more difficult and to
recreate something is simpler than
creating something out of nothing. So
now he's reminding his brother over here
that are you forgetting that you're
denying the day of judgment but your
mere existence is a sign that the day of
judgment is easier than bringing you
into existence right the fact that
Allahhana wa ta created you out of
nothing and uh you know created you out
of soil at that time right and then
created you out of this fluid and then
he shaped you into a man subhan allah
reminding us all of our humble
beginnings no matter how wealthy how
rich how powerful you become come. We
all have these humble beginnings that
each and every one of us were created
from the reproductive fluids of our
parents. That is the reality of it.
Subhan Allah. That is those are our
humble beginnings that we always need to
remember. And this should never allow us
to become arrogant and proud and
condescending. Right? So he's reminding
him of all this. Remember your humble
beginnings and also remember that just
like Allah subhana wa ta'ala created
you, it's even easier for Allah subhana
wa ta'ala to recreate you and thus have
the day of judgment and thus have the
day of judgment. So he says that is your
situation and that is your case but as
for me Allah subhana wa ta'ala is my
lord and I will not associate any
partners with him. What does that mean
not associate any partners with him?
that I attribute all of my success to
Allah subhana wa t'ala. Whereas the
other one he attributed all of his
success to himself and all of the
possessions to himself. Believers always
believe that indeed to Allah subhana wa
ta we belong and to him we shall return.
Indeed to Allahhana we belong and to him
we shall return. So this is the shik
that he's referring to that you're
referring all of your success to
yourself and not to Allah subhana wa
tala. I will never do that. He is my
lord. He created me and I will attribute
all success to him.
That only if when you entered your
garden you
said that how amazing is this creation
of Allah subhana wa ta'ala right don't
be amazed with yourself but be amazed
with the creation of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala be create be amazed with the
creation of Allah subhanahu
wa'ta'ala now multiple lessons over here
that when you amazed with something
whether it is something that you
yourself own or someone else owns you
always praise Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
and you ask Allah subhana wa ta'ala to
bless it and you ask Allah subhana wa
ta'ala to bless it in quite a few
narrations from the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam we find that when you
see something from your brother or
sister that amazes you always pray to
Allah subhana wa ta'ala that they bless
it for them right so things like
Allahabar
that oh Allah bless it bless it for them
or even something
simpler or in English may Allah bless it
for them or
even you know something along those
lines uh is sufficient something along
those lines is
sufficient but make sure that you always
praise Allah subhana wa ta'ala and this
is how you prevent yourself from giving
the evil eye this is how you prevent
yourself from giving the evil eye Now,
how about the reverse? How do you
protect yourself from receiving the evil
Allah? Right? So, a couple of things.
Number one, constantly make your of the
morning and the evening,
particularly. And then number two, make
sure that you're not showing your
successes off. Make sure that you're not
showing your successes off. I know we
live in a in a in a time where we're
encouraged to document everything and
stream everything and show everything
but be very selective of who you share
your successes with. You know this is
from practical experience and this is
even from the dean that in order to
continue your success continue thanking
Allah subhana wa ta'ala without a shadow
of a doubt but be very selective of who
you share your successes with. Do not
share your success with everyone because
you will find from amongst people those
that do not want you to succeed and
those that want you to fail and you
don't want to you know be in the
eyesight of those individuals be like
out of mind out of sight right that's
what we want from those people that uh
may be jealous and may have envy in
their hearts subhan allah so be very
selective of the successes that you
share make sure you thank Allahhana the
blessings that you do have and make
yourar regularly. Make yourar
regularly. This is a part of a greater
statement known
as and is the statement
of who was asked by the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam should I not
tell you about one of the treasures of
paradise and he said of course oh
messenger of Allah and he said it is to
sayahillah. Now what does it mean one of
the treasures of paradise? It's very
fascinating that when you look at what
Im say about this that it is a treasure
that has been dug in paradise and this
treasure chest you don't know what's
inside of it but you know there's a
massive amount of compensation reward
you know enjoyment pleasure whatever it
may be waiting for you. So the more you
say it, the more of this treasure you're
going to get and you're not going to be
disappointed because it's something that
Allahhana ta is going to give you. So
how do you
use So you
use in times of amazement in times of
you know uh being impressed but you can
also
use when catastrophe catastrophe strikes
right that you know uh the earthquake in
Turkey and in Syria. May Allahh make
things easy for them. For those of you
unaware they just had another u
earthquake uh a few hours ago. Subhan
Allah. uh that was quite uh intense as
well. May Allah subhana tala protect
them and all of the um of Muhammad
sallallahu alaihi wasallam mean uh in
times like that you
say that there's no power or might
except with Allah subhana wa ta'ala but
you can also use it as a form of right
you can also use it as a form of so the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
teaches us to say
So these fivear if you can keep your
tongue busy with them have a huge amount
of reward. Have a huge amount of reward.
Subhan Allah.
Alhamdulillah. One of the narrations
mentioned that these are the statements
through which trees are planted in Jenna
for us. These are the statements through
which the trees are planted for us in
Jenna. So you want to imagine that you
have this barren land and you want all
of these luscious trees planted for you.
Each time you say subhan
allah then these trees are planted for
you and these trees are planted for you
and there are many virtues to this um
that you can find you know the virtues
of uh look at it online and you you you
can find more of it there. So there's no
strength or power except with Allah. And
this is the constant reminder that
everything that we have is from Allah
subhana wa ta'ala. And at any given
moment, Allahh can choose to take it
back. However, if law if you're not
overly attached to it so much so that
it's becoming a hindrance between you
and your worship of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala and you continue thanking Allah
subhana wa ta'ala then those things turn
to a blessing and they will
remain that if you see me as someone uh
who has less wealth and children than
you then you know that's perfectly fine.
This is me being tested with my lack of
you being tested with more of. Both of
us are being tested except in different
ways. But the test of patience is easier
than the test of gratitude. The test of
patience is easier than the test of
gratitude. But what's meant to happen is
that the person that has less should not
covet and the person that has more
should be generous. The person that has
more should be generous. These are the
responses to their tests. So this
conversation took place later on at a
different time. Not necessarily. There's
no clear evidence uh to state that it
took place uh later on. It could be uh
at at the same time like shortly
thereafter. The other brother gave him
da about and gave him a simple call to
action and these are the intentions
behind the conversations. So the
conversations that we have what are our
intentions behind them when we converse
with our family and friends. He was not
asking him to change his whole life. All
he asked was for him to change his
mentality. Right? So attribute your
successes to Allah. Constantly seek
Allah subhana wa ta'ala's help and
recognize that all power and strength is
from Allah subhana wa ta'ala. When a
person leaves their home and says
mashallah nothing will harm them. But
this is not the authentic version of
what's narrated. But rather the
authentic version is that when you leave
your house you
say that you leave your house saying I
put my trust in Allah subhana wa ta'ala
and there's no power or might with Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala and then the angels
say that you have left protected uh
secured and there was one other
statement um let me see if I can quickly
find it inshallah
Let me see if I can quickly find it.
Yes. So, uh there is no might or power
but with Allah and the following will be
said to him. You are guided, defended,
and protected. Meaning the angels will
say you're guided, defended, and
protected as you leave your house. The
devils will go far from him. And another
devil devil will say, "How can you deal
with a man who has been guided,
defended, and protected when he
said when they left their house?" And
this is narrated narrated in Abu D. This
is narrated in Abu D. Okay. So now let's
go on to what happens next. This is
where things are going to get really
interesting and take a quick turn very
quickly. Subhan Allah. Allahhana goes on
to say
that his brother continues on to say
that perhaps my Lord will give me better
than your true gardens. Meaning in the
hereafter I may not be rich in this life
but due to the good deeds that I've done
I hope from Allah subhana wa ta'ala he
will give me much better than your
gardens. And this is just a reminder
that there's nothing in this duny except
that that which is in the is much much
better than right what we see from the
luxuries of this duny are just shadows
and shells of what the luxuries and
enjoyments of the are going to be. This
is just an enticement that entice the
through the little bit that you see uh
be enticed by the by the little bit that
you see in this be enticed by the by the
little bit that you see in this and then
he goes on to say that perhaps Allah
subhana wa ta'ala may send a calamity
from the sky actually let's just read it
he says it may be that my lord will give
me something better than your garden and
will send upon it a calamity from the
sky and it will become a smooth dusty
ground meaning barren
or its water will become sunken into the
earth so that you will never be able to
seek it. Now remember he had these two
luscious gardens, the grape vines, the
date palm trees, the farms that are in
between and then the river that smoke
that flows right smack bang in the
middle. Right? So perhaps a calamity
will come from the sky almost like a
meteor or a major storm will come from
the sky so that it makes the land
completely barren almost as if it didn't
exist. Subhan Allah. And this is the
example that Allahh gives that he brings
the dead to life and can easily make the
life into dead. The life into dead. And
then also the water that you think is
yours and is going to remain there
forever, Allahh can just push it back
into the ground. So the fact that water
is extracted from the ground is
accessible to us at a surface level is a
blessing from Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
But he's being reminded here that it
could easily go back to the ground and
you will not be able to seek it. So this
is that one should not be secure in
their own selves but be seek your
protection with Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
Seek your protection with Allah subhanaa
tala. We should never feel secure with
what we have because Allahhana tala can
take everything away from us at any
point and we can only ensure that we get
more from Allah if we are grateful for
what we have. And this is a you know
again going back to the Turkey
situation. Allah Turkey and Syria, may
Allahh make things easy for them and
protect them and replace what they've
lost uh with
better. You know how quickly did that
happen? Subhan Allah. Literally in a
span of a few
minutes, people lost their whole entire
lives. Lives were lost, family members
were lost, wealth was lost, residences
were lost, businesses were lost, animals
were lost, right? whole
infrastructure, electricity, power lines
were lost. Like in one moment you're
living and another moment, subhan Allah,
you've passed away or you still have
managed to survive some way or another
through the ti of Allah, but everything
that you knew disappeared. And this is
why it's so important subhan Allah to
not get attached to those material
possessions because they can be snatched
at any one given time and to constantly
make shuk for Allah subhana wa ta'ala uh
as much as you can so that at least you
have a level of contentment and when the
time is right Allahhana replaces it with
better for you. Allahhana replaces it
with better for
you. Then he goes on to say
that his fruits were encompassed by
ruin. Subhan Allah. Whatever his brother
said to him, some time went by. It
actually happened that his brother did
not take heed. He did not change his
ways. He did not thank Allah. He did not
help the poor and the needy. He
attributed all of his success to
himself. So what happened? As we
mentioned, those that are arrogant and
proud and do not take the opportunity to
self humble themselves, Allah subhana wa
ta'ala forces them into humility. And
that calamity and catastrophe struck.
All of his fruits were ruined. And he
turns his hand about in dismay. Meaning
I spent so much on this and there's
nothing left. And there's nothing left.
And subhan Allah at his time of
calamity. What happens? He comes to the
realization, oh I wish I had not
associated uh with my lord anyone.
Meaning I wish I didn't attribute this
success to myself. I wish I didn't think
that this was mine. I wish that I was
helpful and kind to the needy, but now
it's too late. All of it is gone. Subhan
Allah. Allah gave him a chance to repent
and fix his ways, but he didn't take it.
And he recognizes his mistake. And
subhan Allah, this is amazing that Allah
subhana wa ta gives us opportunities to
become grateful in times of prosperity.
But if we don't, he forces us to
recognize our mistakes through
adversity. And this is why in adversity
people naturally turn to Allah because
the soul is forced into humility. And
this is why humility is such an
important characteristic of a believer
because that is what keeps you connected
to Allah. Recognizing your weakness,
recognizing your dependence upon Allah,
recognizing your need of Allah subhana
wa ta'ala, that is what will keep you
connected to him. But if you're not, if
you do not have that humility, then you
think uh in a state of self-d delusion
that I am independent. I do not need
Allah. And even though we would never
dare utter such words, the soul starts
to believe it by forgetting Allah
subhana wa ta'ala. The soul starts to
believe it by forgetting Allah subhana
wa ta'ala. So this man, he's forced into
remembrance over here. And there was for
him no company to aid him other than
Allah. Nor could he defend himself. So
he had no one to help him nor could he
protect himself. showing his weakness
and the weakness of all all others that
you know the Quraysh call upon and all
idoltors call upon right no one can help
you in your time of need other than
Allah subhana wa ta'ala there the
authority is completely for Allah the
truth he is best in reward and best in
outcome
Allahbar right so this is the story of
the Quraysh that if they don't repent to
Allahh and fix their ways
and you know be sincere with Allah
subhana wa ta'ala everything will perish
so this is the example that Allahhanaa
gives to warn the Quraysh remember
they're coming to ask about uh these
three questions if you go back to the
beginning of the story and in these
three questions Allahhana reveals and in
this now they're being reminded that
turn back to Allah or this is going to
be your fate and no one will be able to
protect you and no one will come to your
aid before that happens turns to Allah
turn to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala turn
to Allah subhana wa ta'ala. So he
regretted how much time and energy he
had put into everything because it was
completely destroyed. Now that is the
example of the life of this world that
you put all this time and energy into
this dunya for what though? It's not
going to go with you to the hereafter.
Why not start investing in those things
that are going to go with you in the
hereafter? So enjoy from this as much as
you need for the current moment but work
hard and struggle hard for building your
may Allah grant us. It is not a problem
that he had a lot of wealth. The problem
is that he did not believe in Allah or
thank Allah or attribute the success to
Allah. The brother did not become a
believer. Subhan Allah. He had the
opportunity and chance but he did not.
He either recognized what he did wrong
in that moment or this is what he will
say in the when he will realize the
truth. But it will be too late at that
point. But it will be too late at that
point. As for the the brother not
becoming a believer, again there's no
clear evidence of that. This is an
opinion that is stated but the clear
example over here is what are we meant
to take away from it? What are the
Quraysh meant to learn from it? That
before we become so self-d delusional,
turn back, mend our ways and attributed
our attribute our successes to Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala. Now another
um parable is brought forth but we're
going to conclude over here inshallah
ta'ala and we have 11 lessons that we
learn from this section. We have 11
lessons that we learn from this
section. Number one the dangers and
harms of arrogance, pride and gratitude.
Number two, the importance of humility
and gratitude. Number three, the finite
and temporary nature of this world as
opposed to the infinite and everlasting
nature of the world to come. Number
four, love the world blinds a person
from seeing the truth. Number five, all
blessings or gifts from Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala. Number six, everything
happens according to the divine will,
decree and wisdom of Allah. Number
seven, true wealth is in
contentment, not in material things.
Number eight, faith and materialism are
in conflict with one another. I'm not
fully certain that that wording is as
accurate. Right? That's something that
we need to explore. But what we will say
that the and the are in conflict with
one another. The and the are in conflict
with one another and not uh faith and
materialism. Or actually no, you know
what? Sorry. I think materialism as a
concept. Yes. materialism as a concept
and faith as a concept are at uh odds
with one another. So let's stick with
that. Faith and materialism are in
conflict with one another. So the the
believer should not be materialistic
meaning getting things from this dunya
purely for the sake of this dunya and
showing off and so on and so forth.
Number nine, wealth can be taken away in
the blink of an eye. Number 10, there is
no true guardian or protector other than
Allah subhana wa ta'ala. And number 11,
mankind is weak and helpless without
Allahhana tala. Mankind is weak and
helpless without Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala. Now what I want to conclude with
is the
statement love of this world is the
origin of every sin. Love of this world
is the origin of every sin. And that is
what we're going to be concluding with
uh by reflecting on that statement. So
let's uh turn off the screen
share. There we go. Okay. Alhamdulillah.
So now this statement that love of this
world is the origin of every sin. If you
think about it, that's so true. Subhan
Allah. Every sin that is committed is
because a person has become heedless of
the
hereafter. Seeking heedless of seeking
the reward from Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
heless of the punishment of the
hereafter and that every sin that is
committed is because of the love of this
world or by being deluded by the life of
this world. And that's like one of those
things that you know what you put on
like a a sticker and you put it on like
your dresser, you put it on your, you
know, board uh that you constantly see
that you're constantly reminded by it
that every sin that we
commit, may Allahh forgive us.
is a result of our overindulgence and
over loving of this
world.
Okay. Now let's take some questions
inshallah. What is the name of the book
by for parables of the Quran? It's
called the book of parables and it's
there's a summarized version of it I
want to say translated into English. So
if you look book of parables uh you'll
find it uh online.
Um actually one of the imams um in my
masid shikh Hamza he's actually teaching
this on Sundays. So if you are
interested in going through some lessons
if you go through go to the ISC
um Facebook page every Sunday you'll see
uh sessions after by Hamza. Uh he's
going through the the book of parables.
I'm not sure if he's using or someone
else's but I know that's what he's going
through. What is the dua for preventing
evil eye that you mentioned? This is
part of the remembrances of the morning
and the evening.
It's that in the name of Allah through
whose mentioning of his name no harm or
evil can take
place and he is uh the allhearing and
the all
knowing. What is the wisdom behind the
test of patience is easier than the test
of
gratitude. I think subhan Allah, you
know, when you're in a moment of
weakness, we always look at those who
are more strong and the source of all
strength is Allahhana wa ta'ala. So that
is why naturally turning to Allah in
moments of hardship and calamity is
easier
um than
um remembering Allahhana in times of
ease, comfort and luxury, right? So
that's why it's easier to go through the
test of patience than the test of
gratitude because you're reminded of
your weakness but in moments of
prosperity uh you're not reminded of it.
You're not reminded uh of it. So that's
why it's easier
Uh do you know some ways we can show
gratitude to Allah for the blessings we
have besides just feeling it in our
heart even though
technically we cannot uh ever really do
shuk for the blessings we have yes
there's quite a few things number one as
a part of our dua asking Allahhana to
make us from the the shaken and the
right that Allahh makes us of those that
uh are grateful to him and those that
remember him. Um number two is to use
the blessings that Allah has given us to
uh get closer to Allah. So whatever
Allah has given us from blessings, use
those blessings to get closer to Allah
subhana wa ta'ala. And then number three
is regularly saying alhamdulillah.
Regularly saying alhamdulillah. Right?
So one of the things that we want to
take away from this class today is to
develop a habit of saying subhan Allah.
Alhamdulillah.
So those are some of the ways that we
can increase our gratitude. Now our
brother Nadil uh lesson number one are
the dangers and harms of arrogance,
pride and ingratitude. Number two, the
importance of humility and gratitude.
Number three, the finite and temporary
nature of this world as opposed to the
infinite and everlasting nature of the
world to
come. Number four, love of the world
blinds a person from seeing the truth.
Number five, all blessings are gifts
from Allah subhana wa ta'ala alone.
Number six, everything happens according
to the divine will, decree and wisdom of
Allah. Number seven, true wealth is in
contentment and not material things.
Number eight, faith and materialism are
in conflict with one another. Number
nine, wealth can be taken away in the
blink of an eye. Number 10, there is no
true guardian or protector other than
Allah. Number 11, mankind is weak and
helpless without Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala. And then as a concluding
reminder, we said love of the world is
the origin of every sin. Love of the
world is the origin of every sin. Mesa
Jabir uh it's not a website. It's the uh
Facebook page of my masid which is IC
uh actually I'll just type it out.
Islamic information society of Calgary.
So if you go to our Facebook page every
Sunday Hamza is going to I'm not sure if
it's or someone else's uh but you can
catch lessons from
there and then
um okay so
Fatima Nadia mah I'm glad you were able
to catch the lectures you know this the
beauty of technology mashallah you're in
North America I'm in Australia Yeah, how
Allahhana wa tala provides
um yeah subhan allah subhan
allahhana help the people of Turkey and
Syria and others are affect
affected okay and I think yeah that's it
so my dear brothers and sisters let's
conclude with that today inshallah and
then uh next
week we start with uh the next example
that Allahhana ta gives
Allahhana
says and give them the parable of the
life of this world. It is like water we
sent down from the sky. Then it mixes.
Actually, let's turn the next page to
get the translation. Then it mixes with
the vegetation of the earth. then it
becomes chaff scattered by the winds and
Allah is capable of all things. So just
like Allah subhana wa ta gave the
example of this man's garden being
destroyed now Allah subhana wa ta is
speaking about a greater example which
is the life of this world which is the
life of this world and that's what we're
going to begin with next
week with Allah's and Allah's help and
guidance so let's conclude with that we
ask Allahh by his beautiful names and
attributes to make us of those that
remember him and to thank him that
Allahhana tala makes of those that
constantly recognize their dependence
upon him that they recognize their own
weakness and the strength of Allah. They
recognize the independence and
self-sufficiency of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala and our dependence upon the most
uh independent Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
May Allah subhanaa tala forgive us and
guide us and use us to guide others and
to increase us in our blessings and to
increase us in righteous deeds and in
faith and in knowledge that is
beneficial. My dear brothers and
sisters, till next week.